RSNA LUMBAR SPINE CHALLENGE

>>Purpose of this notebook:

>>This notebook aims to give a brief overview of what data is available in the challenge and how to get started with visualizing some of the conditions in our dataset


Overview of the clinical problem:

Degenerative spine conditions adversely affect people’s quality of life. Detecting these conditions is crucial for determining therapeutic plans for patients. Therefore, it is essential to develop methods for detecting and assessing the severity of degenerative spine conditions on imaging.

This challenge primarily focuses on identifying three types of conditions in the lumbar region of the spine (refer below for the anatomical overview). The three conditions we aim to assess are:

Foraminal narrowing (on either the left or right foramen at a specified level).
Subarticular stenosis (on either the left or right side at a specified level).
Canal stenosis (only at a specified level).
Each of these conditions can manifest at various levels within the spine itself, specifically at each vertebral disc (e.g., L4/5 corresponds to the vertebral disc between the L4 and L5 vertebral bodies).

For each of the conditions, you'll need to predict whether the degree of compression is normal/mild, moderate, or severe. You can refer to the example test submission sample_submission.csv to get a better idea for what we're looking for in terms of output. For each case, you'll have to output a score from 0 to 1 representing the probability of the patient having a specific grade (normal_mild, moderate, severe), at the spinal level (l1_l2, l2_l3, l3_l4, l4_l5, l5_s1), for that condition (spinal_canal_stenosis, left_neural_foraminal_narrowing, right_neural_foraminal_narrowing, left_subarticular_stenosis, right_subarticular_stenosis):

1.Anatomical Overview:

1.1 The spine is divided into four regions: the cervical region (with 7 vertebral bodies), the thoracic region (with 12 vertebral bodies), 
the lumbar region (with 5 vertebral bodies), and the sacral region (with 3-5 fused vertebral bodies).

1.2 Between each vertebral body in all of the regions (except the sacrum) is a vertebral disc.
Furthermore, along the posterior aspect of each vertebral body lies the spinal cord. At each vertebral body,
spinal nerves leave the spinal cord through openings between vertebral bodies called foramina.

1.3 Compression of the spinal cord or any of the nerves can cause pain to patients.
Things that can cause compression of these nerves/the spinal cord include a bulging vertebral disc,
degenerative changes in the bones itself (leading them to grow protrusions/become compressed), trauma,
or thickening of the ligaments surrounding the spinal cord.

2.Foraminal Narrowing Overview¶

The spinal cord has spinal nerves that exit the spinal canal through openings called foramina.
The foramina are best viewed in the sagittal plane. Sometimes these openings can become compressed, resulting in foraminal narrowing.
This compression results in pain for patients along the nerve distribution that is downstream of the compression.

2.1 Subarticular Stenosis Overview

Subarticular stenosis is due to compression of the spinal cord in the subarticular zone (this compression can be best visualized in the axial plane).

2.2 Canal Stenosis Overview

Canal stenosis is impingement on the spinal canal (where the spinal cord travels).
Impingement can be due to a bulging vertebral disc, trauma, bony osteophytes (outgrowths of the vertebral bodies due to degenerative changes),
or ligamental thickening (of the ligaments that run along the length of the spinal canal).
The degree of compression is best assessed in the axial plane.

2.3 Imaging Overview

MRI imaging of the spine can be taken in three planes: the axial plane, the sagittal plane, and the coronal plane.
The two main image types you'll need for this challenge are the axial and sagittal planes.
The axial plane takes images horizonal slices (perpendicular to the spine) across the body from top to bottom.
The sagittal plane takes vertical slices (parallel to the spine) going from left to right.

3. MRI images come in multiple variants.
They can generally be classified as either being T1 weighted or T2 weighted.
T1 weighted images show fat as being brighter.
The inner part of bones would appear brighter on T1 images.
T2 images show water as brighter.
The spinal canal would appear as brighter on T2 images.
MRI images are not standardized with regards to the pixel values that are output from it (unlike CT images).
So you'll need to figure out how to standardize these images (or maybe you wont need to at all, i'll leave it up to you).

4 Expected directory structure:

├── ExploreData.ipynb 
└── /kaggle/input/rsna-2024-lumbar-spine-degenerative-classification/
    ├── test_images/
    │   ├── 1005139/
    │   │   └── 609308237/
    │   │       ├── 1.dcm
    │   │       └── ...
    │   └── ...
    ├── test_series_descriptions.csv
    ├── train_images/
    │   ├── 4003253/
    │   │   └── 702807833/
    │   │       ├── 1.dcm
    │   │       └── ...
    │   └── ...
    ├── train_label_coordinates.csv
    ├── train_series_descriptions.csv
    └── train.csv
